So in most web applications,
you're gonna need to loop over
a list of data at some point.
Here we have a list of data of
the celebrated cats of YouTube.
And the way that we can loop over them in
a spelt component is with the each block
and that looks a little bit like this.
Each cats is cat and
then close it with the slash again
and that renders our list.
So this cat variable is being
created by the each block and
then you can use that inside
it to pull out cat.id to
this property here in cat.name.
Often you'll also need to get
the index of the current element and
so in the same way that you would have
a second argument if you were using
array.map or array.foreach,
you can do the same thing here.
So comma i.
And then down here,
we can do i + 1, colon.
And then the cats are numbered.
We can also use destructuring
inside here the same way
that you could in a regular
JavaScript function.
So instead of passing
through this cat value,
we can destructure it into its
component properties, ID and Name, and
then replace the references to cat
with the values directly, like so.
Now, keyed each blocks are a little
bit harder to explain so bear with me.
What happened before was
that we created a list and
then if that list were to change, it would
always add items at the end of the list or
remove items from the end of the list.
It wouldn't remove items from
the middle of the list or
add items in the middle of the list.
And that is sometimes a problem.
So in this component,
in this thing dot svelte
we're exporting a value called current.
But we're also creating
a value called initial,
which is fixed to the value of current
when the component is first instantiated.
And we're doing that so that we can
demonstrate something that goes wrong
when you're using a regular each block.
If we remove the first
item from this array, and
this is what a block looks like.
We have a thing component, and
we're passing thing.color.
Then the current value is changing.
It's passing through the second,
third, fourth, and
fifth values to the components.
And now the third, fourth, and
fifth, and now the fourth and fifth.
But the components themselves have
the first value and the second value, and
that's obviously wrong because we
want those two things to match.
What we want when we remove the first
thing is for the first component to get
taken out, and for the second, third,
fourth, and fifth to stay where they are.
Rather than removing the fifth component
and then the fourth component and
then the third component, and
then changing the data inside them.
And to do that we use
the keyed each block.
And the way that that works is
inside the each block opening tag,
we specify a way of
identifying each item uniquely.
Put that inside parentheses,
like so, thing.ID.
And now when you remove the first thing,
instead of removing the last item and
then changing the data in all of
the others, it's actually going to remove
the first thing component, and so
the colors will continue to match.
And this becomes particularly
important when you start using
element transitions on
items inside each blocks.
It's also generally more efficient if you
have this type of data that's changing
because cell is able to remove
blocks that no longer exist and
leave other components untouched
rather than having to update
everything past the point
at which the array changed.